GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: Republican
candidates take back their
pledge to support
the party's nominee, as New York
and Wisconsin
become campaign grounds.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
Former secretary of state
Madeleine Albright
and former National Security
Adviser Stephen
Hadley, back from a recent trip
to the Middle
East, talk about a way forward.
GWEN IFILL: And how California's
Coachella
Valley struck a unique deal
between developers
and conservationists to protect
its desert
life.
TOM KIRK, Coachella Valley
Association of
Governments: In a lot of places
throughout
this country, we know that we
have done development
perhaps in a rash and vast way.
In the Coachella
Valley, we didn't want to do
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Wisconsin's primary
is less than
a week away, and the stakes keep
getting higher,
as party divisions appear to
grow more deep.
John Yang is in Wisconsin for
us, and reports
on the day's events.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
The Republican Party hasn't
treated me properly.
JOHN YANG: Donald Trump started
his day in
Green Bay, touting his strength
with voters
and seeming to warn party
leaders not to block
his nomination.
DONALD TRUMP: They haven't
treated me fairly.
But I have got millions of more
votes and
we have got a movement going on.
Millions
of people are voting that didn't
vote before.
JOHN YANG: That followed last
night's CNN
town hall, where the Republicans
backed off
previous commitments to support
their party's
eventual nominee.
ANDERSON COOPER, CNN: Do you
continue to pledge
whoever the Republican nominee
is?
DONALD TRUMP: No. I don't
anymore.
ANDERSON COOPER: You don't?
DONALD TRUMP: No, we'll see who
it is.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Let me tell you my solution to
that.
(LAUGHTER)
SEN. TED CRUZ: Donald is not
going to be the
GOP nominee. We're going to beat
him.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
If the nominee is somebody that
I think is
really hurting the country and
dividing the
country, I can't stand behind
them, but we
have a ways to go.
JOHN YANG: Today, Trump argued
that he, not
Ted Cruz, would be the strongest
choice against
Democrat Hillary Clinton in the
fall.
DONALD TRUMP: He will not be
able to beat
Hillary. And believe me, the one
person she
doesn't want to run -- and I
know this for
a fact -- the one person she
doesn't want
to run against is Donald Trump.
JOHN YANG: Trump again defended
his campaign
manager, who's been charged with
misdemeanor
battery, for allegedly grabbing
reporter Michelle
Fields.
By contrast, Cruz was in Madison
for what
he called a celebration of
women. He appeared
with his wife, Heidi, and former
rival Carly
Fiorina.
SEN. TED CRUZ: I have news for
the Democratic
Party. Women are not a special
interest. Women
are a majority of the United
States of America.
This campaign, at its core, I
believe, is
about three issues: jobs,
freedom and security.
And women, every bit as much as
men, care
about jobs, freedom and
security.
JOHN YANG: John Kasich stumped
in New York
state, which votes on April 19,
stopping in
Queens this afternoon.
GOV. JOHN KASICH: Nobody is
going to have
enough delegates going into the
convention.
Ted Cruz now needs almost 90
percent of all
the remaining delegates to be
the nominee.
That is not going to happen.
Trump needs about
55 percent or more. That's not
going to happen.
JOHN YANG: Clinton was also in
New York, which
she represented in the U.S.
Senate. Campaigning
in Harlem, she blasted Trump for
bluster and
bigotry.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
When a candidate for president
says we can
solve America's problems by
building walls,
discriminating against people
based on their
religion and turning against
each other, well,
New Yorkers know better.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Our
diversity is a
strength, not a weakness.
JOHN YANG: Back in Wisconsin,
Clinton's Democratic
rival, Bernie Sanders, insisted
he's got the
momentum at a town hall in
Madison.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I think there was a poll just
came out today
in Wisconsin, similar to other
polls, which
had us beating Trump by big-time
double-digit
numbers.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: In every
one of these
polls, virtually every one, not
every one,
almost every one, we do far
better against
Trump and the other Republican
candidates
than does Hillary Clinton.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Tonight, Sanders
continues to campaign
in Wisconsin. And Trump and
Kasich appear
in town halls hosted by MSNBC.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang in Milwaukee.
GWEN IFILL: Trump pretaped his
town hall appearance
this afternoon, and caused a new
stir over
abortion. We will look more
closely at how
he's managed to keep the
spotlight on himself
after the news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: President
Obama commuted prison sentences
for 61 drug
offenders, highlighting his push
to overhaul
the criminal justice system.
More than a third
were serving life sentences.
Most will now
be freed at the end of July.
After the announcement, Mr.
Obama lunched
with people who had had their
sentences commuted
previously.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
It is my strong belief that, by
exercising
these presidential powers, I
have the chance
to show people what a second
chance can look
like, that I can highlight the
individuals
who are getting these second
chances and doing
extraordinary things with their
lives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In all, President
Obama has
now commuted the sentences of
almost 250 inmates.
The White House said that is
more than the
previous six presidents
combined.
GWEN IFILL: The city of Newark,
New Jersey,
agreed today to reform the way
its police
treat minorities. Federal
investigators found
the police made unconstitutional
stops and
arrests and resorted to
excessive force too
often.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Under a settlement with the
Justice Department,
the police will revise its
policies, and officers
will start wearing body cameras.
Two Minneapolis police officers
will face
no charges in the death of a
black suspect
that sparked protests. Jamar
Clark was fatally
wounded in a struggle with the
officers last
November. Today, the county
prosecutor said
he had concluded that the pair,
Mark Ringgenberg
and Dustin Schwarze, had reason
to fear for
their lives.
MIKE FREEMAN, Hennepin County
District Attorney:
In this case, officer
Ringgenberg subjectively
believed that Clark had or was
in the process
of obtaining control of his
weapon, and that
were Clark able to remove the
weapon from
his holster, both Ringgenberg
and Schwarze
likely would be shot.
Ringgenberg's subjective
belief is also objectively
reasonable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some community
activists decried
the decision and called for new
protests.
GWEN IFILL: The governor of
Virginia has vetoed
a bill that would allow clergy
and others
refuse to marry same-sex couples
on the basis
of religious beliefs. The
Republican-controlled
legislature approved the bill,
but Democratic
Governor Terry McAuliffe said
it's unconstitutional.
Earlier this week, the
Republican governor
of Georgia vetoed a similar
bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Iran today,
the supreme
leader defended test-firing
ballistic missiles
and warned against weakening
that effort.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei posted a
statement
online, saying: "Those who say
the future
is in negotiations, not in
missiles, are either
ignorant or traitors."
That was seen as a slap at
former President
Akbar Rafsanjani, who'd called
for dialogue,
not missiles.
GWEN IFILL: Migrant sailings
from Turkey to
Greece surged today just before
officials
begin enforcing an agreement to
send them
back. Nearly 770 people arrived
in the last
24 hours, and as Greek
authorities dealt with
them, the U.N.'s refugee chief
made a fresh
appeal in Geneva.
FILIPPO GRANDI, United Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees: We must find a way
to manage
this crisis in a more humane,
organized and
equitable manner, and this is
only possible
if the international community
is united and
in agreement on how to move
forward.
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile, as the
weather warms,
the migrant flow from North
Africa is also
picking up. The Italian coast
guard and navy
rescued more than 1,300 people
just today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Japanese
government regulators
gave the go-ahead today to
activate an ice
wall around the wrecked
Fukushima nuclear
plant. The underground structure
is supposed
to freeze the ground and block
radioactive
water from leaking into the
Pacific Ocean.
A massive earthquake and tsunami
severed damaged
the plant in 2011. The water is
used to keep
melted reactor cores from
overheating.
GWEN IFILL: Taiwanese company
Foxconn has
agreed to buy Japan's struggling
electronics
brand Sharp for $3.5 billion.
It's the first
foreign takeover of a major
Japanese electronics
producer. Foxconn also assembles
Apple's iPhones.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, the Food
and Drug Administration eased
the rules for
the abortion-inducing drug
Mifeprex in order
to expand access. Women may now
take the drug
later in pregnancy and make
fewer doctor's
visits. FDA's changes are
expected to undermine
existing restrictions in several
states.
GWEN IFILL: Wall Street managed
to keep its
rally going today. The Dow Jones
industrial
average was up 83 points to
close at 17716.
The Nasdaq rose 22 points, and
the S&P 500
added nearly nine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And prominent MIT
economist
Lester Thurow has died. He
focused on income
distribution early in his
career, turned to
the challenges of globalization,
and in recent
years warned of the growing gap
between rich
and poor. He also wrote several
bestselling
books on economic policy for
general audiences.
Lester Thurow was 77 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
why Donald
Trump's rhetoric is appealing to
millions
of voters; Madeleine Albright
and Stephen
Hadley discuss the U.S. role in
the Middle
East; a peace deal that could
change Colombia's
cocaine trade; and much more.
GWEN IFILL: Donald Trump has now
been leading
in the polls for eight months,
making him
the prohibitive favorite to win
the Republican
Party nomination this summer.
His celebrity has driven media
coverage, which
in turn has boosted his
celebrity. The result?
The New York Times found Trump
has received
nearly $2 billion of free media
attention
during the campaign, nearly
twice as much
as the original entire 17-member
field.
Today, he once again
demonstrated one of his
greatest skills, hijacking the
news cycle
with a provocative comment, this
one about
abortion.
CHRIS MATTHEWS, MSNBC: Do you
believe in punishment
for abortion, yes or no, as a
principle?
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
The answer is that there has to
be some form
of punishment.
CHRIS MATTHEWS: For the woman?
DONALD TRUMP: Yes. There has to
be some form.
CHRIS MATTHEWS: Ten cents, 10
years, what?
DONALD TRUMP: I don't know.
That, I don't
know.
(CROSSTALK)
CHRIS MATTHEWS: Well, why not?
DONALD TRUMP: I don't know.
CHRIS MATTHEWS: You take
positions on everything
else.
DONALD TRUMP: I find -- I do
take positions
on everything else. It's a very
complicated
position.
GWEN IFILL: Today, both pro- and
anti-abortion
forces rejected Trump's latest
controversial
statement.
So, why does he survive? And how
has he upended
politics?
We zero in on what's behind
Trump's appeal
and what's changed about the
electorate with
Stuart Stevens, Mitt Romney's
chief political
strategist in the 2012 election,
McKay Coppins,
a senior writer for BuzzFeed
News who has
covered Trump and is the author
of a book
on the Republican Party's
efforts to take
back the White House called "The
Wilderness,"
and Kathleen Hall Jamieson,
professor of communications
and director of the Annenberg
Public Policy
Center at the University of
Pennsylvania.
Kathleen Hall Jamieson, how much
has Donald
Trump exploded politics as
usual?
KATHLEEN HALL JAMIESON,
Director, Annenberg
Public Policy Center: Donald
Trump has changed
the way we talk about politics,
the kinds
of things that are covered in
news, and the
ways in which politicians gain
access.
Essentially, his free airtime is
what anybody
else in an earlier campaign
would have paid
for and called advertising.
GWEN IFILL: McKay Coppins, has
he changed
inherently the way the GOP is
formulated,
the way it functions, the kinds
of candidates
it will nominate in the future?
MCKAY COPPINS, BuzzFeed: I think
he's exploited
a shift in the GOP over the past
eight years
or so in the Obama era, which is
basically
the crumbling of the traditional
GOP establishment,
the party committees, the
fund-raisers, the
donors, who used to wield all
the influence,
and now has kind of taken
advantage of this
new right-wing
counterestablishment that is
made up of new right-wing media
outfits and
pressure groups, and really
figured out how
to court them and ride a wave of
influence
into becoming basically, you
know, the six-,
seven-, eight-month front-runner
of the Republican
Party nomination fight.
GWEN IFILL: Stuart Stevens, it
hasn't even
been four years since you were
helping to
run Mitt Romney's campaign, yet
so much seems
to have changed. You have been
pretty outspoken
in your criticism of Donald
Trump.
But take a step back as an
analyst and tell
me, why do you think this is
right now?
STUART STEVENS, Former Romney
Campaign Senior
Adviser: Well, I think there's
two ways to
look at Donald Trump.
One is that he's a function of a
weak field
that miscalculated what I would
call the "Guns
of August" -- I refer to that
great book about
the beginning of World War I. No
one wanted
it to happen, and yet it's
happening.
The other would be that actually
maybe it's
not that unusual that we have
seen, in crowded
fields, where Republican primary
electorate
will nominate someone who says
things and
does things that makes him
unelectable in
the fall. We saw this in Indiana
with Mourdock
in the Senate race. We saw it
with Todd Akin
in the Missouri Senate race,
with Sharron
Angle in Nevada.
So, what could be happening here
is just,
on a national scale, we have
seen played out
in states, which might not be
that crazy,
because, really, a national
primary is not
really a national primary, but a
series of
states that are playing out.
It's the same
people that vote in the states.
We just haven't
seen it happen in a presidential
primary.
GWEN IFILL: One of the things,
Kathleen Hall
Jamieson, which seems different
about Donald
Trump is, he has great skill at
changing the
topic and of stealing the
headline from anybody
else who seems to be having a
good day. Is
that also part of what you see
that is different?
KATHLEEN HALL JAMIESON: Yes.
When Trump -- when a
vulnerability opens up
for Mr. Trump, and the news
cycle begins to
feature the vulnerability, he
effectively
changes the topic by attacking,
by doing something
outrageous or eccentric, and
suddenly the
entire news agenda shifts. And
instead of
focusing on the serious
potential exchange
and the vulnerability that has
initially been
exposed, we're galloping off in
some other
direction.
And the electorate isn't
informed about the
substantive reason that there
might have been
concern about the original
statement.
GWEN IFILL: This is interesting,
because you
make that point on a day when we
have been
-- we're watching a lot of the
kind of coverage
of his statement about abortion.
And he has since put out a
statement, McKay
Coppins, saying that's not
exactly what he
meant. Is that an example of
what Kathleen
is talking about?
MCKAY COPPINS: Yes, I do think
that Trump
has a remarkable skill for
hijacking news
cycles.
I also think that it's what
drives him more
than almost anything else. I
remember I spent
some time with him in 2014, and
I ended up
on his plane, you know, the
massive 757 Trump
jet, and I remember watching
him. He had just
given a speech that morning in
New Hampshire.
I remember watching him spend
20, 30 minutes
changing the channel back from
MSNBC, to CNN,
to FOX News, just searching
desperately for
some coverage of the speech.
And I remember that the thing
that struck
me the whole time I spent with
him was how
much he cared about media
coverage, how much
he cared about attention. And in
a sense,
his entire presidential campaign
has been
one long media spectacle.
I don't know how much it
prepares him or shows
whether he's ready to be
president, but it
certainly shows his -- shows off
his skills
as a marketer, and he really
does have unparalleled
talent in that regard.
GWEN IFILL: So, Stuart Stevens,
let's pivot
back to what you were saying a
moment ago
about what happens in the fall
campaign.
We have seen polls in Wisconsin
today, a new
one, that shows that Donald
Trump is at 70
percent unpopularity. We have
also seen national
polls which show him as
unpopular as well.
What does that say, what does
that mean about
the GOP's chances in the fall?
STUART STEVENS: Well, I think
that we shouldn't
talk about Donald Trump as a
success. He's
running the worst campaign we
have ever seen
in modern history.
The reason he's able to hijack
news cycles
is that he doesn't care what he
says and he
doesn't care about the
ramifications about
it. When you're willing to do
that, when you're
willing to sort of put on a
suicide vest and
pull the cord, you will get
attention, but
you will lose a general
election.
He's going to get killed in the
general election,
absolutely slaughtered, and it
will be a disaster
for the Republican Party.
GWEN IFILL: But, Kathleen Hall
Jamieson, the
Trump voters, we have seen, are
loyal, and
they are steadfast, even if they
are presented
with evidence that what he is
saying is not
true. So, is that the brand that
we see at
work?
KATHLEEN HALL JAMIESON: What we
see, I think,
is a candidate who very artfully
has capitalized
on a large-scale sentiment in
the American
electorate that says that
government doesn't
appear to be working well,
politicians have
promised and not delivered.
And here's someone who comes
outside the political
establishment, outside any
political background,
and argues, I have a different
kind of competence,
a competence that will let us
win again -- that's
the first part of his brand --
that is demonstrated
by what I have already done as a
businessman.
I'm highly successful.
Second part of his brand, he has
all these
photo-ops in places that he's
built. And,
third, I'm uncorrupt and
uncorruptable. I'm
financing myself.
Now, if you assume that
everybody else who
is seen by these voters in some
ways to them
politics as usual, then the
Trump alternative
looks like change, even if at
times he's inconsistent,
even if at times he says
outrageous things,
even if those voters don't
actually believe
he will do some of the things he
says he will
do.
We saw that in Peter Hart's
focus group, Annenberg
Public Policy Center Voices of
the Voters.
Some of his own voters said, no,
I don't actually
believe he's going to build a
wall or deport
all those people. I like him
anyway.
GWEN IFILL: McKay, I want to ask
you about
-- I know you're covering more
than just the
Republican side of this.
So, does Donald Trump's ability
to dominate
the headlines, dominate the day,
does that
help or hurt the front-runner on
the Democratic
side? Does that hurt Bernie
Sanders? Does
it help Hillary Clinton?
MCKAY COPPINS: Well, I think
Stuart is right
that the way that Trump has
managed to dominate
media is by saying outlandish,
provocative
things that have made him
actually, one poll
recently showed, the most
unpopular presidential
candidate since David Duke ran
for president.
So he is nationally very
unpopular. But I
do think that there is something
to be said
for the fact that so much
attention and so
much coverage has been focused
on Donald Trump,
on the Republican side of the
race in general,
but on Trump in particular, that
it does have
a fascinating dynamic that has
played out
in the Democratic side, where
Hillary Clinton
actually might face a lot of
tough scrutiny
in the general election that she
hasn't necessarily
faced on a wide scale in the
primary.
I still, though, think that
Trump has done
so much damage to his own brand,
as you were
just talking about, with the
national electorate,
that it's going to be hard for
him to fix
that before November.
GWEN IFILL: Stu Stevens, why is
it that when
Mitt Romney came out, not once,
not twice,
maybe multiple times, and
criticized Donald
Trump, tough -- using tough
language, why
didn't that stick?
STUART STEVENS: Oh, I think it
has stuck.
He did it in Ohio, and Trump
lost Ohio. He
did it in Utah and he lost in
Utah. And I
think that there is good
indication here that
this is beginning to sink in
with Republican
voters. The latest numbers
showed him 10 points
behind in Wisconsin to Ted Cruz,
who probably
is not going to be accused of
being one of
the great natural politicians of
our day.
I think Republicans are probably
taking a
second look here. Look, on
average, the polls
show that Donald Trump is 17.5
points behind
Bernie Sanders. You have to
really think about
that. Very quickly, you're into
a discussion
not about holding the White
House, not about
holding the Senate, but about
holding the
House.
Hillary Clinton has 50 FBI
agents looking
into her, according to The
Washington Post,
and Donald Trump still is 10
points considered
less honest than Hillary
Clinton. That's hard
to do. We don't have a lot of
Hispanic Republicans,
and 60 percent of the Hispanic
Republicans
don't like Donald Trump.
So, this is a toxic candidacy,
and I think
that before Republicans embark
on that, I
think they're beginning to take
a look at
what it would mean for the
party. You're seeing
a lot of conservatives. Ben
Sasse, a deeply
conservative senator from
Nebraska, said that
he will not support him and he
will look for
an alternative.
So, I think that there is
something happening
here, and I hope that
Republicans will go
in a different direction.
GWEN IFILL: Thank you all very
much.
For the record, "NewsHour" has
requested an
interview repeatedly with Mr.
Trump. And we
have yet to make that happen.
They have yet
to make that happen. We will
keep trying.
McKay Coppins, senior political
writer for
BuzzFeed, Kathleen Hall Jamieson
at the Annenberg
School of Communications, and
Stu Stevens,
former Romney strategist, thank
you all very
much.
MCKAY COPPINS: Thank you.
KATHLEEN HALL JAMIESON: You're
welcome.
STUART STEVENS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Since the start
of the Arab
uprisings five years ago, we
have seen a tectonic
shift across the Middle East and
North Africa,
upending the political order of
the last century.
What began with hope has
dissolved into civil
war, extremist violence and
strife. The human
toll has been enormous, with
hundreds of thousands
dead and millions more
displaced. And the
role the United States has
played and will
play in the Middle East is now
being examined
in depth.
One group looking at these
issues is the Middle
East Strategy Task Force at the
Atlantic Council,
a think tank here in Washington.
Its co-chairs of the task force
join me now.
They are former Secretary of
State Madeleine
Albright, who served in the
Clinton administration,
and former National Security
Adviser Stephen
Hadley. He served in the George
W. Bush administration.
And we welcome both of you back
to the "NewsHour."
Secretary Albright, let me start
with you.
Why take on this added
responsibility now
co-chairing this task force?
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT, Former U.S.
Secretary
of State: Well, it's great to be
with you
and with my friend Steve.
The reason that we did this is
because we're
concerned about the fact that
people are looking
at the Middle East kind of in
short-term ways
and doing Band-Aids that have
been going on,
and that it was really important
to take a
deeper, longer look, because the
issues, as
you raised them, are going to
take a long
time to resolve.
And we needed to really take a
deeper look.
We also wanted it to be
bipartisan, and we
looked at a number of areas. One
was the security
issue, but governance issues,
issues to do
with religion, refugees,
education, the economy.
We had papers that we did with
that.
And then we went to the
countries in order
to really get a view of what is
going on.
We also have a lot of
international advisers,
but part of it, Judy, is -- and
the way that
you opened this, it is as
serious and terrible
as you described, but it also
has whole opportunities.
And those are the things that we
wanted to
look at.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's what I
want to ask
you about, because you have just
come back,
as the secretary mentioned, from
a trip to
the region.
Many people look at this part of
the world
and they see a crisis in every
country, whether
it's ISIS, or a repressive
leader or a refugee
influx crisis. How do you see
the region?
Do you see it as a collection of
problems,
or a place that has a manageable
set of issues
that you can get your arms
around?
STEPHEN HADLEY, Former U.S.
National Security
Adviser: Well, it's very tough.
I mean, it is a crisis in the
Middle East,
but it's also a crisis from the
Middle East.
And what I think people don't
realize is the
global consequences of this.
There are, of
course, economic crises, but we
have, of course,
refugee flows that are taxing
neighboring
states. They are a real problem
for the European
Union, putting enormous stress
on the European
Union.
There is, of course, a terrorist
problem,
which is increased, as we saw,
with attacks
on Brussels and Paris. So it is
a crisis in
the Middle East. It is a crisis
from the Middle
East. It's affecting the whole
country -- the
whole globe.
At the same time, as Madeleine
pointed out,
there are positive things going
on. One of
the things we noticed is, youth
are playing
a role in their societies. They
are empowered,
they are connected, they are
entrepreneurial.
And you are seeing start-up
commercial ventures
starting. You are seeing
start-up bottom-up
community organizations that are
trying to
solve local community problems.
There's a
real bottom-up entrepreneurship
that is going.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But we don't hear
about that
here.
STEPHEN HADLEY: We don't hear
about them.
And one of the things we have
tried to do
is -- one of the things we want
to do is sort
of bring that to the attention.
There is an
opportunity for the refugees not
just to be
a burden, but with the kind of
training and
education, they can actually be
a benefit
to the societies in which they
are now residing
and to rebuilding the societies
they can return
to.
There are opportunities for
education, to
teach people problem-solving and
to counter
the violent extremists.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you -- is
it possible,
Secretary Albright, to
prioritize which country
is more important than the
other, or does
the United States have to
approach this as,
we have got to look at the
entire region?
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Well, we do.
I mean, we were taking about it
this way.
We have to look at the local
aspect of things,
because we need to respond to
some of the
changes that are taking place
inside, as Steve
mentioned, but also regionally.
We do have
to look at it regionally and
globally.
And so the countries can help
each other,
and we did discus with them the
possibility
of kind of looking at some kind
of regional
security agreement, but, at the
same time,
I think we have to recognize the
differences
in the countries.
Tunisia, quite a different
place, for instance,
from Egypt in terms of how it's
beginning
to deal with its political
situation and its
economic situation, a good place
to invest.
Egypt has the problem of being
very large
with a huge unemployed young
population.
So, we have looked at the
specifics in the
countries, but also how they
could be dealt
with regionally.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But doesn't --
Stephen Hadley,
doesn't the security have to
come first, dealing
with ISIS, dealing with whether
it's a repressive
dictator who is -- a civil war,
as you have
in Syria?
STEPHEN HADLEY: Absolutely.
And the message is, there are
green shoots,
we call them, messages of hope
coming out
of the Middle East that need to
be nurtured.
And we need to nurturing them
now, because
over the medium and long term,
they offer
the hope of a more prosperous
and secure Middle
East.
But in the short run, they're
vulnerable to
the terrorists. They're
vulnerable to the
tyrants. And in the short run,
we have to
deal with exactly the problems
you described.
And one of the things we will do
is talk about
some of the things, that in the
short to medium
term, we need to do.
We need to work on all three
problems together,
countering ISIS, bringing down
the sectarianism,
and solving the civil wars.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: I think one
of the things,
Judy, is that everybody is
concerned with
ISIS, or Da'esh, but the
priorities are a
little bit different, because
they also have
internal priorities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They being?
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: The
countries in the region.
And, also, they have conflicts
between two
countries. For instance, the
Saudi-Iranian...
JUDY WOODRUFF: The historic...
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: The historic
aspects,
or the Tunisians and Egyptians
are very worried
about the Libyans.
And so there is the general
aspect that dealing
with ISIS is a priority, but not
the only
thing that they're thinking
about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How does the
United States
avoid, Steve Hadley, being
overwhelmed by
this, because, as Secretary
Albright just
said, every country has its own
set of issues?
The U.S. has to look at this, it
seems, and
make some sense of it and figure
out what
should be tackled first.
STEPHEN HADLEY: Well, it is an
overwhelming
problem.
And the first point that we want
to make in
this task force is that the
United States
is affected by this problem, as
is Europe
and a lot of other countries.
And it is in
the United States' interest to
try to help
the Middle East get to a more
stable and prosperous
future.
But we heard in the region a lot
of criticism.
Some people said the United
States historically
and sometimes -- and the Bush
administration
did too much, and the Obama
did too little. How come you
Americans can't
get it right?
And one of the things we're
trying to do is
come up to and approach the
Middle East that
protects our interests, that
contributes to
what the people in the Middle
East believe
is their future, but does it in
a way that
is sustainable over time?
And I think, with the right
kinds of investments,
we can do that. But it is -- it
is -- we're
going to have to rethink it.
We're going to
have to build a bipartisan
consensus. And
then we're going to have to
sustain it, because
this problem is going to be a
long time in
fixing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it is not
easy to get it
right, is it, Secretary
Albright, in that,
as we just heard, sometimes, the
U.S. is seen
as doing too much, getting too
involved. Other
times, it's seen as not doing
nearly enough.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Well, I
think, because
it is so overwhelming and
complicated, we
need to do a better job of
explaining why
this matters to us.
As Steve said, it's not only
things that are
happening inside, but also the
pressures from
-- globally, and to try to
explain why it's
important to Americans. And it's
important
to us, obviously, because the
president wants
to keep Americans safe, but also
because we're
concerned about the humanitarian
aspects of
it, obviously, the resource
aspect, our relationship
with Israel.
And so we have to explain that,
but I do think,
also, we need to understand that
we found
it's not easy to be the United
States there.
We were saying, damned if you
do, damned if
you don't. And we -- but I
believe, as so
does Steve, that we have to be
involved.
And so we are going to make a
point, I think,
of talking about what the
opportunities are,
as well as the problems, so that
the American
public understands why the
United States needs
to be involved with partners.
And that is
what we also have to do, is make
clear that
the coalitions that are being
built need to
stay in place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we will
continue to follow
the progress of the task force
and hope to
stay in touch with you as you
move forward.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former Secretary
of State Madeleine
Albright and former National
Security Adviser
Stephen Hadley, thank you.
STEPHEN HADLEY: Nice to be with
you.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Very good.
Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
conservation
vs. development in California's
Desert Valley;
and the story of Holocaust
survivors told
in photos of abandoned books.
But, first, the government of
Colombia is
in negotiations with Marxist
rebels, the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia, or
FARC, to end
50 years of war.
The country's infamous drug
trade, which fuels
the conflict and helps finance
the insurgency,
has been a major point of debate
at the peace
talks. If a deal is signed, it
could prompt
radical changes in the
production of illicit
crops, like coca, the raw
material for cocaine.
Special correspondents Bruno
Federico and
Nadja Drost traveled to the
heart of the coca
trade in the southern region of
Putumayo to
find out what impact a peace
deal would have.
The report is narrated by Ms.
Drost.
NADJA DROST: It's high noon, and
the sun scorching,
as pickers grab at the leaves of
coca plants.
MAN (through translator): For us
owners of
the crop and workers who puck
it, it's a big
process to harvest it, to get
the powder.
NADJA DROST: Long before white
powder cocaine
hits the streets of the U.S. and
Europe, it
starts in a field like this, in
an isolated
patch of the Putumayo region in
Colombia's
south, where coca leaves are
harvested and
then processes into a coca base,
the foundation
of cocaine.
MAN (through translator): Two
acres produces
5,000 or 6,000 grams of coca
base and each
gram is cheap, sold for about 50
cents.
NADJA DROST: These pickers are
at the bottom
of the rung of Colombia's
multimillion-dollar
cocaine industry. But in
providing the material
for cocaine, they risk arrest on
drug-related
charges and don't want their
faces to appear
on camera.
MAN (through translator): This
is illegal,
you know. If the government
comes and sees
the laboratory, they will burn
it. And if
they see the guys working here,
they will
take them away. It's a real
problem.
NADJA DROST: Even so, these
workers face the
risks of the job because they
have few other
options. If they were to grow
food crops,
they say, they would have to
travel great
distances to market for
rock-bottom prices
and little profit. Coca provides
them a way
to make a living.
MAN (through translator): Legal
work doesn't
pay much, but this pays well,
you know? These
guys can make $25, $30 a day,
but, elsewhere,
a day laborer is worth $6 a day.
NADJA DROST: That's why, here in
Putumayo,
ground zero of the coca trade,
coca is the
main livelihood for locals.
But that could drastically
change should a
peace deal be signed between the
FARC and
the government. Negotiators
debating how to
address Colombia's infamous drug
trade have
agreed to put an end to illicit
crops.
Colombia's drug trade generates
the FARC an
estimated $200 million a year,
according to
InSight Crime, a group that
tracks the illicit
drug trade. The rebels are
considered narco-traffickers.
But Joaquin Gomez, the top
commander of the
southern bloc says that's an
unfair characterization.
He says the FARC's southern
bloc, says that
is an unfair characterization.
He says the
FARC doesn't exist because of
the drug trade;
they draw on it by taxing it to
finance their
cause.
JOAQUIN GOMEZ, FARC (through
translator):
There's been one relationship or
another indirectly
with narco-trafficking, but
that's why there
are crimes are related to
rebellion, because
it's been to get the funds or
means to keep
confronting the enemy of class.
NADJA DROST: The U.S. State
Department claims
Gomez has overseen the
production of thousands
of tons of cocaine and offers a
reward of
$2.5 million for his capture.
But as part of the peace deal,
Colombia's
President Juan Manuel Santos
visited the U.S.
in February and asked Washington
to drop drug-related
charges against FARC leaders.
Since 2000,
the U.S. has spent over $9
billion on Plan
Colombia, fighting the narcotics
field insurgency,
part of the effort, aerial
fumigations to
eradicate the coca plant. Crops
dropped by
over half by 2014.
But production is back on the
rise, and Colombia
has overtaken Peru as the
world's top producer.
Aerial spraying has also killed
food crops
and been blamed for serious
health problems.
Now, as a part of the expected
peace accords,
both the government and the FARC
have committed
to supporting farmers to
substitute their
coca crops for legal ones, but
locals worry.
RICARDO, Colombia (through
translator): What's
the fear? That if coca ends,
there will be
a lot of people without jobs.
NADJA DROST: And coca base is so
important
to this town, it's even used to
buy goods,
a valid currency here. The only
way locals
can imagine coca substitution
programs working
is if the governments invests in
ways to make
alternative crops viable, so
that communities
don't have to relay on coca.
RICARDO (through translator): We
hope that,
instead of gunshots, there is
social investment.
We will leave coca to the side
and invest
in cattle-raising or something.
NADJA DROST: Coca leaves,
ammonium, cement,
sodium hydroxide and gasoline,
rudimentary
labs like this keep churning out
coca base.
MAN (through translator): If
there's peace,
we won't count on coca. If the
government
doesn't come through, well, we
will have to
keep going with coca.
NADJA DROST: If a peace deal
doesn't provide
alternatives to coca, there will
be no shortage
of campesinos willing to fill
demand for drugs
abroad, far away from these coca
fields.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
reporting with Bruno
Federico, I'm Nadja Drost in
Putumayo, Colombia.
GWEN IFILL: The Colombian
government announced
today that it would soon begin
peace talks
with the country's second
largest rebel group,
the National Liberation Army, or
ELN. Colombia's
half-century of violence has
killed nearly
a quarter-million people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: striking a
balance between
development and conservation to
protect the
desert ecosystem of the
Coachella Valley in
California.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
has the story.
CAT WISE: The views from Chino
Canyon high
above Palm Springs are grand.
The rocky hillsides
are home to the endangered
Peninsular bighorn
sheep and a number of other
species. But this
tranquil canyon has long been an
environmental
battleground.
NICKIE MCLAUGHLIN, Activist: If
the project
had been completed, you would
have been looking
at a 500-room hotel, a five-star
resort, and
all surrounded by an 18-hole
golf course.
CAT WISE: Nickie McLaughlin
heads up a local
nonprofit that recently
purchased 600 acres
of privately owned land in the
canyon to prevent
that development.
NICKIE MCLAUGHLIN: There will be
nothing here.
It will be preserved as it is in
perpetuity.
This was a huge success.
CAT WISE: The push to save Chino
Canyon is
part of a much larger
environmental conservation
effort unfolding in Coachella
Valley, a 45-mile
stretch of desert dotted with
upscale cities
like Palm Springs, as well as
areas of deep
poverty.
The population here is expected
to almost
double in the next 20 years.
Golf courses
and condos butt up against
fragile desert
ecosystems.
TOM KIRK, Coachella Valley
Association of
Governments: In a lot of places
throughout
this country, we know that we
have done development
perhaps in a rash and vast way.
In the Coachella
Valley, we didn't want to do
that.
CAT WISE: Tom Kirk heads up the
local government
agency now managing a plan that
took more
than 10 years to develop and
that will be
on the books 75 years into the
future.
It's called the Coachella Valley
Multiple
Species Habitat Conservation
Plan. Nearly
2,000-pages long, it is
essentially a huge
compromise between government
agencies, private
landowners and developers,
scientists, and
environmental groups.
How did you bring everyone
together?
TOM KIRK: They were brought
together perhaps
not by choice, but by need.
Before there was
a plan, every project was
evaluated on its
own. It would take a lot of
time. There'd
be a lot of uncertainty. Today,
instead of
dealing with every project
individually, we
look at a million acres at the
same time.
CAT WISE: Kirk, who brought us
to a now preserved
area called Whitewater Canyon
that had been
slated to be an ATV park, showed
me how the
habitat plan works.
TOM KIRK: You can actually
develop anywhere
in the plan, but it is very
difficult to do
so in conservation areas, and
very easy to
do so, relatively, on the valley
floor.
CAT WISE: Out of the million or
so acres in
the valley, 700,000 have been
designated as
conservation areas, where the
land is kept
mostly pristine. Outside of the
conservation
areas, development can go
forward in a timely
manner because the necessary
endangered species
permits have already been
secured.
The plan is designed to ensure
the survival
of 27 endangered and threatened
species, large
and small animals, rare plants,
and one little
desert dweller well known in
these parts,
the fringe-toed lizard.
CAMERON BARROWS, Ecologist:
Here's a little
baby fringe-toed lizard, just
hatched probably
this past fall.
CAT WISE: I met up with one of
the few people
who has a special permit to
catch this endangered
species, Cameron Barrows. He's
an ecologist
who is monitoring with a team of
scientists
how the protected species are
faring under
the plan.
CAMERON BARROWS: Even though we
have a finite
number of species that we're
trying to protect
here, we're really trying to
protect the entire
ecosystem. We're measuring
everything. We
want to make sure that this is
an intact system.
We don't want to be able to say
in 75 years,
you know, we forgot about that
mouse, and
it went extinct. Oh, well.
CAT WISE: Barrows was on the
scientific advisory
committee that provided guidance
about which
areas of the valley need to be
protected,
an effort he says that charted
new ground
in conservation science.
CAMERON BARROWS: We're striking
this balance
between habitat and development.
And this
was one of the first places in
the nation
that tried to really strike an
effective balance.
But, to do that, we had to apply
the best
science we possibly could.
Nature is complex. It's really
complex. And
to be able to say this patch is
enough or
this level of connection is
enough is really
challenging to do that.
CAT WISE: This underpass behind
me plays an
important role in the habitat
plan. It allows
animals on this side of busy
Interstate 10
to move safely to the other
side. It is one
of a number of so-called
wildlife corridors
that are scattered throughout
the valley.
But ensuring the protected areas
are connected
in perpetuity has been an
ongoing effort.
About 25 percent of the land was
privately
owned when the plan went into
effect in 2008.
Landowners are not forced to
sell, but if
they do, they are compensated at
market rates,
or they can pursue minimal
development approved
by the plan. So far, tens of
millions of dollars
have been spent to secure about
90,000 acres,
or a third of the designated
conservation
areas.
Still, many landowners,
developers, and even
some cities in the valley
initially opposed
the plan due to the limits on
development.
GRETCHEN GUTIERREZ, CEO, Desert
Valley Builders
Association: There was some
struggles. Nothing
is ever easy when you take on a
project of
this size.
CAT WISE: Gretchen Gutierrez is
CEO of the
Desert Valley Builders
Association.
GRETCHEN GUTIERREZ: Right now,
what you're
seeing is the first phase, which
is models.
And there's going to be 166
single-family
houses, single and two stories,
in this development.
CAT WISE: The permitting process
here went
fairly quickly and no lawsuits
were filed.
And that's why Gutierrez says
developers eventually
got on board.
GRETCHEN GUTIERREZ: What it's
provided for
our members is the surety that
they can move
their projects forward. I don't
think anyone
wants to see the plastification
of any of
the communities out here, or the
paving over
of the world with concrete.
But, at the same point in time,
you need to
have continued growth in terms
of new residences,
in terms of new businesses, so
that it all
gives you a good quality of
life.
CAT WISE: Developers now pay a
fee for each
property they build, and that
money goes towards
purchasing more land in the
conservation areas.
Additional funds come from a
variety of sources,
including government grants.
While many in the valley agree
the plan is
working, whether it can hold up
over the long
run is up for debate. Recently,
plans for
a new housing development within
this conservation
area were submitted to the
county for consideration.
The project called Paradise
Valley would back
up to Joshua Tree National Park
on one side,
and the area is considered
critical habitat
for the threatened desert
tortoise.
The development highlights one
of the gray
areas of the plan: In the large
conservation
areas, up to 10 percent of the
land can be
developed. The developer,
Glorious Land Company
Enterprises, declined to speak
with us on
camera, but provided a written
statement.
It reads in part that the
development will
incorporate new urbanism and
smart growth
concepts, and that planners and
environmental
consultants for the project are
in consultation
with regulatory agencies.
Cameron Barrows is one of a
number of scientists
and local environmental groups
opposed to
the development.
CAMERON BARROWS: Without any
question, the
tortoise population will decline
if that happens.
It's incumbent on all of us, the
scientists,
as well as everybody else that's
involved
in this plan, to sit down with
these folks
on a regular basis and say,
remember why we're
doing this. Remember why you got
to do this
development or that development,
because the
plan is here.
CAT WISE: The proposed
development still faces
extensive review before any
ground is broken,
but many here will be watching
closely for
how things play out as
conservation efforts
continue.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Coachella
Valley, California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Coachella
Valley's plan was
among the first of its kind when
it was developed,
but, in recent years, the
strategy has been
catching on. There are now more
than 1,000
plans that seek to protect
single and multiple
species.
Efforts in the valley got a
boost when President
Obama named three national
monuments in Southern
California, and one of them
overlaps with
the conservation plan.
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight:
Imagine finding
a library from the 1940s, a
window into the
time before the deportation of
some 70,000
Jews from what was then
Czechoslovakia.
Jeffrey Brown reports on a
photographer who
learned something about himself
in the decades-old
bookshelves.
JEFFREY BROWN: At first glance,
you might
wonder: What is this? What am I
looking at?
Then it hits you: These are
books, fragments
of books, in various states of
decay.
They were photographed where
they'd been left,
an abandoned schoolhouse in the
town of Bardejov,
Slovakia.
Yuri Dojc, a successful art and
commercial
photographer who's lived in
Canada since 1968,
returned to his native country
after his father's
death, to learn more about his
own Jewish
roots.
He came upon the schoolhouse
almost by accident,
when a man he'd met told Dojc
there was something
he must see.
YURI DOJC, Commercial
Photographer: And then
he take us across the square. He
opened this
door. And we were just stunned.
JEFFREY BROWN: You had no idea
what you were
walking into?
YURI DOJC: I had no clue. But I
was stunned
by the beauty of decaying books.
I wasn't
thinking about history at that
moment. It's
the visual effect of these old
books was so
beautiful.
JEFFREY BROWN: Beautiful, but
horrible at
the same time, as the sense of
history set
in, for this was a Jewish
schoolhouse, left
as it had been in 1942, as Jews
were being
rounded up and taken by train to
the concentration
camp at Auschwitz.
The story is told in a
documentary Dojc worked
on with another emigre from the
former Czechoslovakia,
Katya Krausova.
The two began by seeking out and
listening
to the stories of Holocaust
survivors.
So, you went to meet these
people, essentially,
right? And one led to another.
KATYA KRAUSOVA, Director, "Last
Folio": Yes,
exactly.
So, here is a mixture and a
selection of some
that, by the time I joined him,
were dead,
and others that we had found
together, like
this couple.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. Tell me
about them.
KATYA KRAUSOVA: They're very
important to
the whole story, because we
heard about them
in another town. And she didn't
want to even
let us come to the house.
And, eventually I said, "Can we
just come
and have tea?"
And once we were there, she
said: "I might
as well tell you my story. Maybe
nobody will
ever come again to ask."
And so she told us her story, a
very strong
woman who talked about how they
were betrayed
and how, when they were taken to
the camps,
they actually believed that they
were going
to work.
And she said that: "None of us
realized once
we got out of the truck that we
would never
be able to say goodbye to
anybody again."
JEFFREY BROWN: Almost all of
these people
are now gone. In "Last Folio,"
the two try
to capture what remains.
So these are books literally
sitting on the
shelves as you walked in?
YURI DOJC: Yes, but I focus on
this particular
group.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why?
YURI DOJC: There is something
like a rhythm
here. There's colors, a chance
this color
to this color to this. So
there's a beautiful
-- look at this. The shades of
color, they
are just stunning.
JEFFREY BROWN: First an
aesthetic experience,
and then more, the books
standing in for,
almost becoming, the lives of
the people who'd
held them in their hands.
YURI DOJC: I changed as a
photographer on
this project.
I only started understanding
what it's all
about. Until then, I was just --
I had fun.
I understand certain aesthetics.
But I was
missing something. And I
realized that you
don't take art pictures with
your eyes. You
take them with your brains, and
I didn't know
that.
JEFFREY BROWN: What does that
mean, to take
it with your brain?
YURI DOJC: You try to express
something which
was -- which is more than just
what I see.
This is a process of showing you
what happened
to those people. Like, I'm
projecting really
people and this whole pain and
all that is
lost into the pictures.
JEFFREY BROWN: And there was one
more shock
for Dojc and Krausova when they
visited another
abandoned building that
contained books from
all over Eastern Europe,
including, incredibly,
one that had belonged to Dojc's
grandfather,
who died at Auschwitz.
YURI DOJC: That was a miracle,
just pure,
pure miracle. And then I was
thinking if this
whole journey's not a miracle.
KATYA KRAUSOVA: So, nothing new
under the
sun, but very important to be
outraged.
JEFFREY BROWN: For Katya
Krausova, there's
more: important echoes to the
destruction
of people and culture still
going on today.
KATYA KRAUSOVA: You know, what
is happening
right now in the Middle East is
very tragic,
because libraries are being
burned, and monuments
are being destroyed.
And that is our heritage, and we
need to somehow
do everything to preserve it.
So, when I say
privileged to have worked on
this, it was
a privilege to learn people's
lives and their
stories. And I think we need to
go on telling
it to each other and to others.
JEFFREY BROWN: From Washington,
D.C., I'm
Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: A college
education can be a ticket out of
poverty for
millions of Americans. But new
research shows
that those who grew up poor may
get less of
a payoff for a college degree
than those who
didn't. What's behind this
disparity?
Making Sense columnist Denise
Cummins writes
that, for many, success after
college is all
about who you know. Read her
take on our home
page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.